
# The Differential-Privacy Zoo

## On the shortcomings of ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP
In the previous blogpost, we have defined $\delta$ in ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP as either the probability of the *Privacy Loss Random Variable* (PLRV), i.e. the quantity:
$$
\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O) = \ln \frac{\mathbb{P}[\mathcal{M}(D_1)=O]}{\mathbb{P}[\mathcal{M}(D_2)=O]} 
$$
to exceed the privacy budget $\epsilon$, or the probability mass of the events for which the PLRV exceeds $\epsilon$. However, in both cases the notion of ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP fails to graps what exactly happens when the DP mechanism fails: is privacy completely destroyed, or does privacy degrades gracefully?

An example of a mechanism $\mathcal{M}$ which is ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP is the so called "*name-and-shame*" mechanism. Suppose that this mechanism takes a database $D_1$ as input containing a sensitive date entry $x_i$ (i.e., imagine an adversary trying to distinguish between $D_1$ and $D_2$ = $D_1 \setminus x_i$). The mechanism scans the database and, with probability $\delta$, outputs $x_i$, and with probability $1-\delta$ does not output anything. It is straightforward to see that the mechanism satisfies ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP. In particular, with probability 
$1-\delta$, we have that the PLRV is exaclty $0$ (indeed, $\epsilon = 0$ as this mechanism provides *almost always* complete privacy by outputting data items which are both in $D_1$ and $D_2$). With probability $\delta$, this mechanism outputs $x_i$, which allows the adversary to distinguish the output generated by $D_1$ and $D_2$. You can also verify that the mechanism satisfies also the second definition of DP (the one with $S^*$).
On the other hand, a widespread technique to make a mechanism DP, which is the Gaussian Mechanism, enjoys graceful degradation of privacy, rather than catastrophic failure like *name-and-shame*.

In short, with probability $\delta$, *all bets are off* as a loss of infinity can happen. Finally, it turns out that the composition theorem we can use for $(\epsilon,\delta)$-DP does not actually yield *tight* bounds (i.e., we can find better bounds).

## Bounding the average case
Assume that we were able to bound the expected value of PLRV, that is:
$$
\mathbb{E}[{\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)}] \leq \epsilon \delta
$$
For the Markov's inequality, this would mean:
$$
P[\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O) > x\epsilon] \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}[{\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)}]}{\epsilon} \leq \frac{\delta}{x}
$$
This means that, by varying $x$, we can trade-off a $\epsilon$ for $\delta$ (a bigger $\epsilon$ achieves smaller $\delta$ and viceversa). This would more nicely describe the behaviour of the PLRV in case of failure, by bounding the tail behaviour.
This is the idea behind several definitions of DP proposed in literature, which however do not stop at imposing tail bounds on PLRV, but go further, for example applying Chebychev's bound on the mean of PLRV or imposing contrainsts on various moments of the PLRV (a moment of a RV $X$ is merely $\mathbb{E}[e^{X^t}]$, for different values $t=0,\dots,n$. They give important information on a RV: for example, the second moment $\mathbb{E}[e^{X^2}]$ is the variance).

Historically, the first relaxation presented by C.Dwork et al. was *Concentrated-DP*:
> A mechanism $\mathcal{M}$ is ($\mu,\tau$)-concentrated-DP (cDP), if for any neighbouring databases $D_1$ and $D_2$, the PLRV has mean $\mu$ and if subtracting the mean from it, we obtain a sub-gaussian RV with standard deviation $\tau$, $\forall \alpha > 1$:
$$
\mathbb{E}_{O \sim \mathcal{M}(D_1)}[\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)] \leq \mu \;\text{and}\; \mathbb{E}_{O \sim \mathcal{M}(D_1)}[e^{(\alpha-1)(\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)]-\mu)}] \leq e^{(\alpha-1)^2 \frac{\tau^2}{2}}
$$

Intuitively, the cDP requires that PLRV to have a small mean, and to be "concentrated" around this mean (hence the name).
This definition offers tighter bounds on composition, however it looses the closeness under post-processing capabilities. 

For this reason, Bun et al. proposed a relaxation of cDP named *zero-concentrated-DP* (zcDP):

> A mechanism $\mathcal{M}$ is ($\xi,\rho$)zero-concentrated-DP (zcDP), if for any neighbouring databases $D_1$ and $D_2$, the PLRV is a sub-gaussian RV with mean $0$ and small variance, $\forall \alpha > 1$:
$$
 \mathbb{E}_{O \sim \mathcal{M}(D_1)}[e^{(\alpha-1)(\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)])}] \leq e^{(\alpha-1)(\xi+\rho\alpha)}
$$
A benefit of zcDP is its closeness under post-processing, while keeping tight bounds (that is why it is usually used in deployments over cDP).

Finally, a further relaxation of zcDP is *Renyi-DP* (rDP):
> A mechanism $\mathcal{M}$ is ($\alpha,\epsilon$)Renyi-DP (rDP) if for any neighbouring databases $D_1$ and $D_2$:
$$
 \mathbb{E}_{O \sim \mathcal{M}(D_1)}[e^{(\alpha-1)(\mathcal{L}_{D_1/D_2}(O)])}] \leq e^{(\alpha-1)(\epsilon)}
$$
We note two differences between rDP and (z)cDP:
- rDP now takes $\alpha$ as a parameter: this means that it does not put a bound on *all* the moments of $\mathcal{L}$ at the same time.
- rDP does not require a linear relationship between the moments and the bound (for reference, (z)cDP required a linear relationship between what $\epsilon$ represents in rDP and $\alpha$, this is why we do not have $\epsilon$ but rather $\tau$ and $\rho,\xi$ in cDP and zcDP).

rDP is a relaxation of zcDP, but it allows for better bounds when composing mechanisms sequentially.

Finally, note that it is possible to convert all the guarantees expressed in terms of cDP, zcDP or rDP in terms of the classical ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP, recovering the intuition we first depicted using the bound on the expected value of PLRV (i.e., the first moment of PLRV).

To sum up, all this definitions we have given try to go behond ($\epsilon,\delta$)-DP by giving a better charachterization of the privacy risk we encour: rather then reasoning about worst-case, they try to reason by averaging the risk, enforcing some statistical bounds on how the PLRV behaves(i.e., trying to model its behaviour for unlikely events).

## Looking at DP as an Hypothesis Testing experiment
So far, all the notions of DP we have encountered were based on bounding the difference between the probability distribution of the output of our mechanism when evaluated on neighbouring datasets (under the hood, they put some bounds on some divergence between the two probability distributions, e.g. the Kullback-Leibler divergence, Hockey-Stick divergence, Renyi divergence).

A different perspective on DP is instead taken by the notion of $f$-Differential Privacy (fDP).

## References
- [A super nice blogpost which introduces the idea and the motivation behind stronger notions of DP](https://differentialprivacy.org/flavoursofdelta/).
- [Nice lecture notes on DP, which also present the "name-and-shame" example](http://www.gautamkamath.com/CS860notes/lec5.pdf).
- [SoK about DP](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.01337.pdf).
- [The DP cookbook by C.Dwork, the original author of DP](https://www.cis.upenn.edu/~aaroth/Papers/privacybook.pdf).
- [Gaussian Differential Privacy: the paper which introduced f-differential privacy](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02383)